#summary Features of VClipse
#labels Featured,Phase-Design
#sidebar TableOfContents

= VClipse Features =

_Please note that this documentation will be enhanced with screen shots._

VClipse is an Eclipse-based integrated development environment (IDE) for product modeling for the SAP Variant Configurator (VC).

== VCML ==

VClipse supports the specification of objects and dependencies in a textual domain specific language called VCML.

VCML allows the specification of the most important aspects of various object types used in a SAP system to build product models.

VCML is able to represent the following object types as text:
 * Bill of Material
 * Class
 * Characteristic
 * Configuration Profile
 * Constraint
 * Dependency Net
 * Interface Design
 * Material
 * Precondition
 * Procedure
 * Selection Condition
 * Variant Function
 * Variant Table (currently only its structure)

The languages for dependencies (source code) is embedded in VCML.
 
VCML supports the specification of partial models.
VC objects can be referenced from other VC objects, but do not have to be defined in detail.
Their definition can be done later or probably already exists in the SAP system.


== VCML Editor ==

The Eclipse-based editor for VCML files offers various features.


=== Syntax Highlighting ===

Certain syntactic constructs of the language like keywords, comments, and strings are shown in different colors.

Syntax highlighting is fully customizable for the user using the preference page.


=== Outline View ===

The Outline view shows the structure of the VCML document.
Two different views on the document are possible:
 * Document order: the VC objects are shown in the order as they appear in the file
 * PMEVC-like order: the VC objects are shown in a hierarchical structure as in SAP's Product Modeling Environment for Variant Configuration (PMEVC) 


=== Syntax Checking ===

The syntax of VCML files is checked automatically.
Syntactical errors are shown in the Problems view.


=== Linking References Objects ===

Referenced objects are linked to their definitions.
If no definition exist for some object, an error is shown.
Ctrl-clicking on an object reference jumps to the definition of the object. 

 
=== Content Assist ===

By typing Ctrl Space, VClipse offers context-dependent suggestions on how to complete some prefix letters.


=== Templates ===

The VCML editor provides pre-defined templates for the insertion of VC objects.
The templates use the standard Eclipse template mechanism and are thus fully customizable and extensible.


== Determining the Difference of Models ===

A VCML file which contains only those objects which differ in two VCML files can be computed using VClipse.


== Transformation into IDocs ==

VCML documents can be transformed into IDocs.
The VClipse preferences allow to filter out certain IDoc types.

VClipse provides a textual language to edit IDocs.


== Outlook ==

VClipse will be enhanced in near future with the following features:
 * RFC-based interface to SAP
 * IDoc-based interface to SAP
 * Management of SAP connections
