#summary VClipse News
#labels Featured
#sidebar TableOfContents

= News =

== Interface Plugins Released (2011-05-18) ==

The plugins which are used to interface to a SAP R/3 system by RFC or PDR have been released.

== Migration to Subversion (2011-05-18) ==

We migrated the version control system back from Mercurial to Subversion. Local modifications and additions can be maintained by tools like git-svn. Subversion is more known to current VClipse users.

== Presentation of VClipse at CWG 2011 Spring Conference (2011-05-10) ==

VClipse has been [http://www.configuration-workgroup.com/webfm_send/2003 presented] at the Configuration Workgroup 2011 Spring Conference in Cologne.

== Update Site (2010-06-24) ==

We created an update site for VClipse. VClipse is available from the update site
http://svn.codespot.com/a/eclipselabs.org/vclipse/trunk/update

== Migration to Xtext 1.0 (Eclipse Helios) (2010-06-21) ==

We migrated VClipse to Xtext 1.0 as released with Eclipse Helios (Eclipse 3.6.x).
Xtext 1.0 offers a number of new features which are immediately usable like _code folding_,
_quick outline_, and _find references_. Several more features like _case-insensitive keywords and identifiers_, _quickfix support_, or _splitting of models into several files_ will be available in future by extending VClipse.

== Migration to Mercurial (2010-06-20) ==

We migrated the version control system from Subversion to Mercurial.
By using a distributed version control system, it is easier for users of VClipse to locally maintain their adaptions and extensions of VClipse in a cloned repository. 

== Migration to Eclipse Labs (2010-06-04) ==

We migrated the VClipse project to Eclipse Labs.
We expect increased visibility in the Eclipse community due to this move.
Since Eclipse Labs is also hosted by Google Code, there is no change in infrasctructure.

== Presentation of VClipse at CWG 2010 Spring Conference (2010-04-20) ==

VClipse has been [http://www.configuration-workgroup.com/node/457 presented] at the Configuration Workgroup 2010 Spring Conference in Vienna.